---
title: "Introduction"
layout: page
---


<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.flag.introduction"> class="introduction" </cnx-pi>

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
* Periodicity
* Occurrence and Preparation of the Representative Metals
* Structure and General Properties of the Metalloids
* Structure and General Properties of the Nonmetals
* Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Hydrogen
* Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Carbonates
* Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Nitrogen
* Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Phosphorus
* Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen
* Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Sulfur
* Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Halogens
* Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of the Noble Gases

</div>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="key-equations" title="Key-Equations"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="summary" title="Chapter Summary"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="exercises" title="Exercises"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="references" title="References"</cnx-pi>

 ![Three photos are shown. The first shows a scientific lab full of equipment in which two people in protective suits are working. The second image shows a man holding a round, reflective disc held inside of a protective, clear container. The third image shows a round disc covered in metallic chips which is behind a protective covering.](../resources/CNX_Chem_18_00_SilWafer.jpg "Purity is extremely important when preparing silicon wafers. Technicians in a cleanroom prepare silicon without impurities (left). The CEO of VLSI Research, Don Hutcheson, shows off a pure silicon wafer (center). A silicon wafer covered in Pentium chips is an enlarged version of the silicon wafers found in many electronics used today (right). (credit middle: modification of work by &#x201C;Intel Free Press&#x201D;/Flickr; credit right: modification of work by Naotake Murayama)"){: #CNX_Chem_18_00_SilWafer}

The development of the periodic table in the mid-1800s came from observations that there was a periodic relationship between the properties of the elements. Chemists, who have an understanding of the variations of these properties, have been able to use this knowledge to solve a wide variety of technical challenges. For example, silicon and other semiconductors form the backbone of modern electronics because of our ability to fine-tune the electrical properties of these materials. This chapter explores important properties of representative metals, metalloids, and nonmetals in the periodic table.

